First Tone

Sunday Evening

A composition of Saint Andrew of Crete

Whose acrostic is “Receive the first-fruits of our lamentation, O Maiden. Yes.”

Ode 1

O come today, my soul, and let us offer the first-fruits of lamentation unto the Theotokos. For she hath redeemed the race of man from Adam's curse, and hath bestowed the blessing and joy.

My tears, as numerous as the Jordan's streams, shall in no wise suffice to wash away the mire of my sins. But cleanse me, O Virgin, by thy compassion.

O Virgin who gavest birth to Christ the sun of righteousness that setteth not, enlighten, I pray, the eyes of my soul darkened by the mist of pleasures and fatness of sin.

Transgressing the laws of the Lord, I have performed every kind of evil. And now as Ι repent, O Lady Mary, despise me not, thy worthless slave, but having compassion, save me.

Ode 3

The serpent hath beguiled me, as once he did to Eve, and by the taste of pleasure expelled me from the paradise of divine knowledge. O Lady who gavest birth to Christ the second Adam, raise me up to life.

Suffering from the madness of Cain, O Virgin, I murdered mine own mind with the sword of lust as if it were my brother, sorely begrudging its ascent. But as thou art the friend of man, save me. 

Adam lamented in days of old, banished from Eden, the entrance blocked by Cherubim. And having fallen from divine knowledge, with tears I beg thee, O Mother of God: pray thou, with all the saints, that I may be delivered from the passions.

May the remembrance of death conduct thee, O my wretched soul, in all the deeds of life. Mingle lamentation with mourning, having a pure and blameless mediatress before Christ who sprouted forth from her.

Ode 4

How great thy wonders, O unwedded Mistress! For thou hast become a mediatress for sinners before the one born from thee. Wherefore, entreat that even I, who have sinned above all men, be reconciled with him. 

Mortify the mind of my flesh, O Virgin, and bring to naught the counsel of the demons and the onslaughts of the passions. And guide me to walk the paths of life, O thou who didst conceive the life of all.

Cleanse the defilements of my heart with tears, O pure one. And by the protection of the august Angels, cause the darkness of my soul and the wandering of my mind to be recalled and guide me toward the path of dispassion. 

I have utterly defiled my mind and soul with shameful thoughts and pleasures, surpassing those in the days of Noah with my shameful offenses. Wherefore I cry: have mercy, O Conceiver of God, and save me from the noetic flood.

Ode 5

Snatch me away from Gehenna’s cruel flame, O thou all-blameless Conceiver of God who gavest birth unto the unapproachable flame of Divinity who became like us by the theandric hypostasis.

I, the wretched one, fear not the punishments that are to come, nor the darkness, nor the gnashing of teeth and the worm, nor the unquenchable fire. Wherefore I beseech thee, O Virgin: deliver me from all these.

Heal the sufferings of my soul that I may magnify thee faithfully, O all-pure one who gavest birth unto the one who hath healed our infirmities by his all-august and saving Passions.

Unlike Lamech, I murdered not the man and youth, O Mother of God, but rather my mind and reason by my offenses. Hence, when I am judged, let not punishment be dispensed but rather cleanse me herein.

Ode 6

I have defiled my body with deeds, my mind with thoughts, and my senses with the touch of the pleasures. Grant me healing from these through the dripping of my tears, O graced of God.

The time of my life hath been consumed by sleep and rest and reveling and wandering thoughts. Wherefore chasten me now, O Mother of God, if only in my old age, and lead me by the hand to repentance. 

Reflecting on the madness of those before the law, I set my hand to shameful deeds, foolishly laying one atop another like walls. Wherefore by the divine Spirit, O pure one, grant me understanding.

The truly haughty ones have laid a trap for me, O all-hymned one. And with the cords of my transgressions they have stretched out snares before my feet. O good one, melt them like a spider's web.

Kathisma

O true and steadfast hope of Christians, bestower of mercy and fountain of sympathy, the key that opens the goodness of God, open for all the gates of compassion, and grant to all, O Mistress, the entrance to the joy of Paradise.

Ode 7

Break asunder, O pure one, the bonds of my heart, the oblivion and fearful ignorance, the blindness of my soul, and the folly with which my mind, being fettered, cannot run toward the expanse of contemplation and the height of divine knowledge.

O my passions and stirrings! O my immeasurable evils! What shameful deed have I not foolishly performed? What hedonic sin have I not committed? Wherefore, O thou pure one, grant me repentance, if only in my old age.

With thy vigilance toward God, O Mistress, drive away the laziness and troublesome drowsiness in me and have compassion on me, O immaculate one, as I chant: O praised and all-glorious God of our fathers!

Woe to me, O my soul! O how thou hast disgraced thyself more than the shameless Ham! Thou hast not covered the shame of thy neighbor with nature and grace, but rather inhumanly despised him. Wherefore fervently turn back now in repentance toward the merciful Maiden.

Ode 8

O my wretched soul, which hath perished most dreadfully from neglect, awaken as if from sleep and make the Theotokos, who alone hath not known man, to be thy mediatress so that she may quicken thee by the ways of repentance and may show thee the paths of dispassion.

Calm the passionate yearnings, O Panagia, and utterly blot out the imaginations of the soul-destroying passions, O pure Mother of God, so that I may ever glorify and bless thee, the only cause of the salvation of all.

I have foolishly indulged in every possible pleasure, and I have shamefully defiled every one of my senses. O undefiled Lady and protectress of all sinners, unto thee I flee for refuge. Deliver me from the fire and eternal darkness.

With the sprinkling of my tears, O pure one, wash the sores and festering wounds of my soul, O thou who didst bear the Christ who healed the lepers and the woman with the issue of blood, so that I too may hear the longed-for voice: Thy faith hath saved thee, go in peace.

Ode 9

I have already come to the end of my temporal life, O Maiden. Woe to my existence! And weighed down by sins, I depart to the endless ages to be punished. O thou who gavest birth to the Judge, cause him to be merciful unto me, O Mistress.

I, the wretched one, have rejected the laws of God and have enslaved myself to the law of sin, having not bowed down to the law of the mind. Having forgotten the laws of nature by thy august child-bearing, subject the law of my flesh.
 
Lift the heavy burden of my accusations, O all-blameless Theotokos, and account me worthy, O pure one, to bear the light yoke of thy Son and God and to travel the path that leads to the portion that is above.

So that thou mayest show the boundless depth of thy mercy and of the goodness and compassion of thy Son, O all-lauded one, grant even unto me, who have sinned above all, forgiveness and the dwelling of Paradise.

Prosomia

Rejoice, all-lauded one, thou most pure living palace of God and bearer of light. Rejoice, thou who hast not known man. Rejoice, divine shelter. Rejoice, unbreakable rampart. Rejoice, thou who hast ineffably conceived God. Rejoice, restoration of Adam and redemption Eve. Rejoice, strength of all the faithful.

Rejoice, fiery throne of God, thou unfading rose. Rejoice, thou who alone didst sprout forth the sweet-smelling lily. Rejoice, Panagia, through whom we have been redeemed from the prior judgment, O Mistress. Rejoice, all-wondrous joy of the world. Rejoice, boast of all the Orthodox.

Rejoice, immaculate one, thou lush and fragrant meadow. Rejoice, blossoming vine. Rejoice, O Virgin, thou fruitful olive tree. Rejoice, myrrh-breathing vineyard of God. Rejoice, densely-wooded and shady mountain. Rejoice, Ever-Virgin, thou pleasant garden of grace.

Fill my heart with joy, O pure one, as thou art compassionate, and set me free from tears, as one who didst give birth to joy, thou who alone art the Mother of God. And rescue me, thy servant, I pray, from all dangers, so that I may glorify and magnify thee with longing, O thou who dost surpass all beings.

Plagal of the Second Tone

Monday Evening

A composition of Saint Andrew of Crete

Whose acrostic is “Let us come again for the sake of good lamentation.”

Ode 1

The wonderful Joel, the great prophet of the Lord, prophetically said to piously mourn and lament with sackcloth, but I despise this. But do thou, O Virgin, save me. 

As one who possesseth a fountain of compassion, O Conceiver of God, wash my body and soul, which have been shamefully defiled, O Maiden, and clothe me in a clean garment of grace.

Despise me not, O good one, who am utterly corrupted in lawlessness and already wholly under the curse of bitter pleasures, but wash me of all filth and save me.

Let the bridegroom, O bride, come forth from the bridal-chamber, says the prophet, and let them now weep. And let us, O my soul, fall down with lamentation before the Mother of the Redeemer.

Ode 3

Let us renew the fields of the soul in this life, sowing virtue, that we may reap the grain of life thither.

O Lady who hast not known man, by thine intercessions before thy Son, quicken me, who am made dead by sin and by the counsel of the demons.

I have fallen because of the absurdity of my deeds, O Lady, and I lie now in a pit of destruction. Grant me repentance, O immaculate one.

I feed the passions in my soul, which are like savage beasts with whom I cannot bear to dwell. I flee to thy protection, O Virgin.

Ode 4

By thy strength, O Mother of God, let the unclean and profane thoughts which are mine adversaries be turned back, and let their bows be shattered. And grant me, thy servant, to walk through tears toward dispassion.

Bound fast by the cords of sins, O Mother of God, I do not cease, but rather I weave more insoluble bonds, adding passions upon passions. And I am become a curse to all, drawing upon me the woe of the prophet.

I cease not scratching the wounds of my soul with the love of pleasure, and I add suffering to the bruises, remaining numbly uncured. Have mercy on me, O Birth-giver of God, and heal me and save me by thine intercessions.

Seeing the events of life passing every day like fleeting dreams, O Conceiver of God, I in no wise take notice of them. But yet I have clung to them like ivy to the top of an oak tree.

Ode 5

Having been lifted up by pride, O all-lauded one, I have fallen into the terrible fall of sin that crushes my soul. Who will raise me up if not thee, O Mother of God? 

Grant me perseverance, O Lady, through all hardships and evil from without, which have suddenly fallen upon me, for I am faint-hearted and deprived of wages.

Deliver me from the stumbling blocks of the demons, O Lady, and from every threat and the outer darkness, for I have steadfastly placed my hope in thee.

Unchaste thoughts disturb my wretched soul, O all-holy Lady, and persuade me to foolishly agree with them. Deliver me from them swiftly.

Ode 6

The Lord called it adultery to look passionately at countenances, but I, O Virgin, sick with incontinence, defile my soul with licentious gazes.

While I am sleeping, thoughts of licentiousness dreadfully attack and force in ticklings and flowings, but spare me from their harm, O all-spotless one.

O Mary, Bride of God, I fall down before thee and cry out with tears: O Theotokos, deliver my wretched soul from the coming judgment and the eternal fire.

I know to remove the causes of idle words, having learned from the Scriptures, but I, O Virgin, am not terrified, busying myself with ill-timed nonsense and arguments.

Kathisma

O good Virgin, make the judge of the world, thy Son, merciful unto me, who have fallen many times. For no one is able to mediate as thou art, being the Mother of the Lord God. Wherefore fervently intercede for me, O only blessed one.

Ode 7

We have sinned. We have worked lawlessness. We have embittered Christ, O Virgin. We have committed every sinful deed, moving him toward wrath. But do thou make him merciful toward us, the condemned.

By thoughts and sensations and deeds, O Conceiver of God, I have wholly rejected the living God, and have been a slave to the tyrants who invented the passions. But do thou deliver me from these and grant me the radiance of repentance.

When my wretched soul is about to endure the separation from the body and there is no one rescuing or comforting it, then, O Lady, stand before me and deliver me from the onslaught of the demons.

My Lord called hypocrisy a great evil in life. May I be rescued by thy strength, O Bride of God, from its deceitful actions, lest Christ cut me in twain with the sword of the Spirit.

Ode 8

As is due, we, the fallen and condemned, call upon thine intercession before thy Son, O Mother of God, so that by thy mediation we may be saved from Gehenna.

Christ came to call sinners to repentance. As many as have rejected his words, come with me and let us fall down before the Theotokos with repentance.

Send down rivers of tears to me and groaning from the soul with anguish, so that I may quench that insufferable flame and attain to the glory of Paradise.

In order to deify mortals, O Lady, thy Son was seen from thee a perfect mortal. Wherefore importune him that Ηe may show me, perfectly cleansed, to be a communicant of his kingdom.

Ode 9

The bridal-chamber hath been prepared in the heavens by thy Son, O Bride of God, full of every joy for those who have kept his commandments blamelessly. But for me is prepared darkness and lamentation and the fire of Gehenna, from which do thou beseech him to deliver me.

Sweat and tears and toil have been thrown down in this stadium, O Bride of God, and thither are the crowns and rewards and prizes. And who is the truly blessed one who sows weeping and reaps rejoicing?

By repentance, O all-pure one, the fallen are once again becoming winged like hawks, making their flight toward the heavenly minds. Μay I myself, the sinful one, also be deemed worthy of their portion, being saved by thine intercessions.

As one who didst give birth to the abyss of mercy, O spotless one, have mercy on me, thy worthless servant, and deliver me from punishment and judgment, O Lady, and deem me worthy of the kingdom of the heavens, O Virgin, so that with longing I may magnify thee.

Prosomia

Rejoice, spotless daughter of the Father and Mother of the Word. Rejoice, bride of the Spirit who art higher and warmer than the Thrones, mightier than the Seraphim, more knowledgeable than the Cherubim, who hast dominion over the Dominions, who art more powerful than the Powers, who surpassest the Principalities, who rulest the Rulers, who art more general-like than the Archangels, who servest more than the Angels the faithful who will obtain salvation.

Rejoice, O Theotokos, queen of all queens. Rejoice, thou who dost surpass all the heavenly Powers. Rejoice, thou who alone art the Mistress of the earth and sea, and the Empress of creation. Rejoice, O all-lauded one, thou mightiest sceptre and valiant stronghold, thou strength and might of kings. Rejoice, divine garden. Rejoice, O pure one, thou death of Hades. Rejoice, O all-blessed one, thou refuge of Christians.

Rejoice, fiery throne of the Lord of kings. Rejoice, divine table who bearest in thy midst the heavenly bread. Rejoice, O all-blameless one, thou fruitful earth who producest the wheat of life, from which those who eat thereof see not death, O Lady, but are brought to eternal life, just as the only Master of all, the nourisher and sustainer, did say before. Rejoice, refuge of the faithful. Rejoice, most wondrous one.

We, who are terribly scourged by afflictions, beseech thee, the supreme champion, and earnestly entreat thee, O Virgin: As one having motherly power toward the Lord, break asunder our enemies, lest they say: Where is the God whom they serve? And may the wretched ones know that we have acquired thee as our only shelter and protection after God, and as a steadfast tower. Do not overlook those who run to thee, O all-blameless one.

Plagal of the Fourth Tone

Monday Evening

A composition of Saint Andrew of Crete

Whose acrostic is “Lamentation hath brought forth grace from God for mortals.”

Ode 1

O Mother of God, grant me a mournful life, narrow and bitter, and full of tears so that I may wash away my filth and stand before the Judge cleansed.

Having chanced upon fleeting, earthly, and sordid unions, I did not respect the shining beauty of the soul, O Mother of God, but with pleasures I rendered my body useless.

O gate of the divine east, open unto me the gates of repentance and deliver me by thy mediation, O Lady, from the gates of death-bearing sin.

Through fasting, tears, and weeping, God is made merciful, O Mother of God, unto those like me who have foolishly grieved him. Make him merciful unto me before the end, O Lady.

Ode 3

The ministering spirits of the heavenly angels bitterly lamented over my fall, and the dark spirits of the aerial demons laughed approvingly, O Birth-giver of God.

With the proper measure of toil by the humble, O immaculate one, the all-wondrous honey of virtue is cultivated. Wherefore strengthen my all-wretched soul to live with a humble mind.

O Lady who art in truth the daughter of the king and the Mother of the Lord of all, banish far from me the sins that now rule over me like a dishonorable servant.

With the sprinkling of tears, O Lady, cleanse the ugliness of my sins and wash away my rotting and festering wounds, and grant health, I pray, unto me, thy servant.

Ode 4

Arise, O fallen ones! Christ commands us not to resist, but rather to receive the compassion of his Mother.

What saved Peter? Only repentance, O Bride of God, as it did the thief, the harlot, and the prodigal. Account me worthy to imitate them.

The one who could not be contained was contained in thy womb, O all-holy one, saving me, who have drowned in sins, by his goodness.

I beseech thee, O Lady, do not abandon me in the hour of affliction, but show thyself to be merciful and deliver me from the wounding of the demons.

Ode 5

I, who have made my garment of baptism useless, need many tears to cleanse it.

With the fear of punishment, O Lady, turn back my mind, which hath been led astray by worldly fantasies.

Look upon me, I pray, and hear my voice, and blot out all my sins, O all-pure one.

Enlighten with thy light of thy countenance, O sun-shaped bride, thy servant who hath been darkened by the passions.

Ode 6

We are indebted to ceaselessly hymn God with heart and mouth, O Virgin, but we are overcome by laziness.

O pure one, rescue me, thy wretched servant, from out of the complex dangers and terrible calamities that now grieve me.

In the hour of my death, O august one, show forth thy help and deliver me from the evil demons seeking to snatch me away.

Let us fast, weep, and mourn while we have time, so that we may revel and dance in the age to come.

Kathisma

The Word of the Father came down to the world, and the angel of light cried to the Virgin: Rejoice, thou blessed one who alone hast guarded her virginity. Rejoice, thou who didst conceive him who before the ages is God and Lord in order to save the race of man from error.

Ode 7

After the winter comes the spring, and after the storm comes the calm, O pure one, and after the darkness of sins comes the light of dispassion through repentance. Wherefore let us, the passionate ones, take courage, repenting.

O aptly named Maiden who didst conceive God incarnate, save my soul, which is ruled by many wicked sins, O blessed pure one, so that I may bless thee.

Thou wast seen to be a fiery throne and divine palace of the almighty, the salvation of the world, and a shelter to those who cry out to thy Son, O all-blameless one: O God of our fathers, blessed art thou!

From sweat and toil and groaning of heart, O Mother of God, awareness is born, and from this, dispassion, whose feet may I, who have fallen more than all, be deemed worthy to reach. 

Ode 8

The king of the heavens willeth that all fill his kingdom, but we, O Virgin, long for Gehenna.

More than the creation of the whole world, O Mother of God, the Creator of all longeth for the salvation of all sinful men.

Because Christ suffered for us, we the faithful are indebted to suffer for him and make dead the soul-destroying passions.

O pure Virgin, protectress of Christians, deliver us from every necessity so that we may praise thee for all ages.

Ode 9

Drip the drops of thy mercy onto me, O Mother of God, and drive away the darkness of ignorance, for thou alone didst conceive the redemption of mortal men.

Covered by the mud of the passions and tarnished by the filth of pleasures, cleanse me, O Lady, as thou art my good protectress.

By the armor of the cross, strengthen the faith of the Christ-loving rulers, O friend of man, by the prayers of she who gave thee birth, as thou are most merciful.

Deliver thy flock, which honors thee, from earthquakes, famine, fire, captivity, and civil war, O graced of God.

Prosomia

Rejoice, ever-virgin Lady who didst faithfully imitate the good one with thy nature, O good one, enriching thyself, O pure one, as a mother with goodness, which is the first and best of his qualities. Wherefore also thou shalt do good unto those who praise thee, as thou art compassionate and a friend of man, and thou shalt guide them toward the enjoyment of the eternal good things, O all-immaculate one.

Rejoice, O pure one, thou blessed tabernacle of God, thou exalted and brilliant palace of the king, thou bridal chamber not made by hands, thou bridal chamber adorned with gold and purple, thou bridal chamber sweet-smelling and all-honorable, thou living palace of precious stones and pearls. Rejoice, O immaculate one, thou all-golden throne, thou living tongs bearing the coal of immaterial fire.

Rejoice, O aptly named Mary who art called the august Mistress of the whole world, as thou art she who gavest birth to Christ the Lord of lords; thou who, being truly ever-virgin, didst enrich thyself by acquiring, beyond perfection, purity of mind, soul, and body, by which all have become thy handmaids, as to a mistress.

Grant me to complete my life through all the august blessings of thy Son, O all-blameless one, to be poor in mind, to weep, to be gentle, to hunger, to thirst for righteousness, to be pure and merciful, to make peace, to be persecuted for God, and to rejoice, exulting in these.
